Overview:


In this assignment, you will build a set of small utilities that are (mostly) versions or variants of commonly-used commands.  We will call your version of this utility my-look to differentiate them from the original look utility. We will also implement a game called wordle.


Objectives:


Re-familiarize yourself with the C programming language
Re-familiarize yourself with a shell / terminal / command-line of UNIX
Learn (as a side effect) how to use a proper code editor such as emacs/vim
Learn a little about how UNIX utilities are implemented
See how pipes can be used to redirect stdout to stdin within a shell
While the project focuses upon writing simple C programs, you can see from the above list of objectives that this requires a great deal of other previous knowledge, including a basic idea of what a shell is and how to use the command line on some UNIX-based systems (e.g., Linux or macOS), and how to use an editor.  If you do not have these skills already, or do not know C, this is not the right course to start learning these things.


This project is to be performed alone.  You can use up to three skip days throughout the semester for late projects; we recommend you do not use those skip days for this initial project.


Summary of what you will turn in:


Set of .c files, one for each utility :  my-look.c, wordle.c
Each file should compile successfully when compiled with the -Wall and -Werror flags
Each should pass tests we supply as well as tests that meet our specification that we do not supply
1. my-look
The program my-look is a simple program based on the utility look. 


1.1 Overview of my-look and look


If you haven't heard of look before, the first thing you should do is read about it.  On UNIX systems, the best way to read about utilities and functions is to use what are called the man pages (short for manual). In our HTML/web-driven world, the man pages feel a bit antiquated, but they are useful and informative and generally quite easy to use.


To access the man page for look, for example, just type the following at your UNIX shell prompt: prompt> man look


Then, read! Reading man pages effectively takes practice; why not start learning now?


Both look and my-look take a string as input and return any lines in a file that contain that string as a prefix.  For an example, we will assume the file has been specified as /usr/share/dict/words. (You may assume that all input will have the same format and contain a subset of the lines in /usr/share/dict/words.) 


You'll see that look and my-look have different command line options; be sure to implement the command-line options specified for my-look.


1.2 Example Usage


A typical usage if you would like to find a list of words that start with "gn" (because who wouldn't like to know this?) would be:


prompt> ./my-look -f /usr/share/dict/words gn


The “./” before the my-look above is a UNIX thing; it just tells the system which directory to find my-look in (in this case, in the “.” (dot) directory, which means the current working directory).  As shown, my-look reads the file /usr/share/dict/words and prints out all the lines that start with the letters "gn".  Thus, the output would be


GNU
GNU's
Gnostic
Gnostic's
Gnosticism
Gnosticism's
gnarl
gnarled
gnarlier
gnarliest
gnarling
gnarls
gnarly
gnash
gnash's
gnashed
gnashes
gnashing
gnat
gnat's
gnats
gnaw
gnawed
gnawing
gnawn
gnaws
gneiss
gneiss's
gnome
gnome's
gnomes
gnomish
gnu
gnu's
gnus
1.3 Compiling


To create the my-look binary, you’ll create a single source file, my-look.c.  To compile this program, you will do the following:


prompt> gcc -o my-look my-look.c -Wall -Werror


This will make a single executable binary called my-look which you can then run as above.


1.4 Suggested C Routines


You’ll need to learn how to use a few library routines from the C standard library (often called libc) to implement the source code for this program, which we’ll assume is in a file called my-look.c. All C code is automatically linked with the C library, which is full of useful functions you can call to implement your program. Learn more about the C library here (Links to an external site.).


For this project, we recommend using the following routines to do file input and output: fopen(), fgets(), and fclose().  You should read the man pages carefully for those three functions. 


We will also give a simple overview here. The fopen() function “opens” a file, which is a common way in UNIX systems to begin accessing a file. In this case, opening a file just gives you a pointer to a structure of type FILE, which can then be passed to other routines to read, write, etc.


Here is a typical usage of fopen():


FILE *fp = fopen("main.c", "r");
if (fp == NULL) {
  printf("cannot open file\n");
  exit(1);
} 
A couple of points here. First, note that fopen() takes two arguments: the name of the file and the mode. The latter just indicates what we plan to do with the file. In this case, because we wish to read the file, we pass “r” as the second argument. Read the man pages to see what other options are available.


Second, note the critical checking of whether the fopen() actually succeeded. This is not Java where an exception will be thrown when things goes wrong; rather, it is C, and it is expected (in good programs, i.e., the only kind you’d want to write) that you always will check if the call succeeded. Reading the man page tells you the details of what is returned when an error is encountered; in this case, the linux man page says:


Upon successful completion fopen(), fdopen(), and freopen() return a FILE pointer.  Otherwise, NULL is returned and the global variable
errno is set to indicate the error.  
Thus, as the code above does,  check that fopen() does not return NULL before trying to use the FILE pointer it returns.


Third, note that when the error case occurs, the program prints a message and then exits with error status of 1. In UNIX systems, it is traditional to return 0 upon success, and non-zero upon failure. Here, we will use 1 to indicate failure.


Side note: if fopen() does fail, there are many reasons possible as to why.  (In general, you can use the functions perror() or strerror() to print out more about why the error occurred; learn about those on your own (using … you guessed it … the man pages!).  However, for this project make sure you print out the error messages we request to stdout.  We will ignore anything you print to stderr.)


Once a file is open, there are many different ways to read from it. The one we’re suggesting here to you is fgets(), which is used to get input from files, one line at a time.


To compare the string to a line from the file, we recommend strncasecmp().  Find more details about string functions on their man page (as well information about the header file you will need to include).


To print out file contents to standard output (stdout), just use printf(). For example, after reading in a line with fgets() into a variable buffer, you can just print out the buffer as follows:


printf("%s", buffer);


Note that you should not add a newline (\n) character to the printf(), because that would be changing the output of the file to have extra newlines. Just print the exact contents of the read-in buffer (which, of course, may include a newline).


Finally, when you are done reading and printing, use fclose() to close the file (thus indicating you no longer need to read from it).


1.5 Using stdin for Dictionary Input


For many utilities, it is useful to be able to read from standard input, stdin (i.e., characters typed directly into the terminal).   Your program, when given the correct command line arguments (see below), should be able to read from stdin instead of using a file as the dictionary.


In Linux, stdin is defined as a FILE pointer, just like what is returned by fopen() and passed to fgets().  (You can even look at the man pages for stdin.). Your goal should be to add as little new code as possible to handle reading from stdin instead of a regular file; don't replicate code needlessly!


1.6 Command Line Arguments


my-look has one required command-line argument: the string to search for.  However, my-look has a number of optional command-line arguments that must appear before the required string.


-V : prints information about this utility; the message should be exactly "my-look from CS537 Spring 2022" followed by a newline.  The utility should then exit with status code 0 without processing any more options.  (Note this an upper-case V, not lower-case.  Lower-case v is often used to signify verbose output.)
-h: prints help information about this utility; you can display this information in the way you think is best.  The utility should then exit with status code 0 without processing any more options.
-f <filename>: uses <filename> as the input dictionary.  For example, "my-look -f ./mywords" will read the file "./mywords" for input.  If this option is not specified, then  my-look will read from standard input (i.e., stdin); it will not open a file called stdin!!!  
If my-look encounters any other arguments or has any error parsing the command line arguments, you should exit with status code 1 and print the exact error message "my-look: invalid command line"  (followed by a newline).
For parsing command-line arguments, we recommend using getopt().  Again, read the man pages for more information.   While getopt() may be overkill for this simple utility, it is useful to know how to use when you have programs with more complex arguments.


When processing the command line, remember argv is an array of strings (where a string is a pointer to characters), and argc is the number of words on the command line.   For example, if the process is run as "my-look -V -h -f ./testfile" then argc = 5, argv[0] = my-look, argv[1] = "-V", argv[2] = "-h", argv[3] = "-f" and argv[4] = "./testfile"


Details


If my-look is passed both -V and -h, it will only process the option that it sees first (and then exit).
For all input, you can assume the lines are a subset of those in /usr/share/dict/words (i.e., you don't have to handle arbitrarily long lines in this utility).
In all non-error cases, my-look should exit with status code 0, usually by returning a 0 from main() (or by calling exit(0)).
If the program tries to fopen() a file and fails, it should print the exact message “my-look: cannot open file” (followed by a newline) and exit with status code 1. 
Note that the comparisons performed between the string and list of words are not case sensitive; that is, "gn" will match with lines containing "GNU" and "gnu".
All output (including error messages) should be printed to stdout.
You can safely assume the user will never search for a prefix string starting with "-". Any command-line arg beginning with "-" is considered an option.
Update: You should ignore non-alphanumeric characters in the input (stdin or file). You should consider only alphanumeric [a-z] and [0-9] for string matching. For example "gnu's" should be treated as "gnus" (stripping non-alphanumeric single quote). You can create a helper function that strips any non-alphanumeric from a string for this purpose. You can assume that the command-line argument will always contain only alphanumeric characters. Try passing the public test test-a4.sh!


2.  Wordle Game
If you have not played wordle, take a break and play it (Links to an external site.). In this part of the project, we will be implementing something similar to the wordle game. You will be given a file (fs) containing a list of words and a string (str). Your task is to print all five-letter words in fs that do not have any character in the string str. Specifically, your code should generate a binary that takes 2 command line arguments as follows:


prompt> ./wordle filename string


If the file containing the wordlist is named word-list.txt and the string is hasnot, your program will be executed as follows:


prompt> ./wordle word-list.txt hasnot


The output of your program should be all lines which have exactly 5 characters (excluding the endline \n character) and none of the character in the string hasnot (i.e. does not have any of these characters: h,a,s,n,o,t).


Example:


prompt> cat word-list.txt
abadc
america
africa
soups
first
prompt> ./wordle word-list.txt not
abadc 
Only abadc, soups and first are five character long. Of these, soups has character o and first has character t, both of which are not allowed as our blacklist string is not (characters n,o,t are not allowed). 


2.1 Compiling


To create wordle, you'll create a single source file wordle.c which you compile with:


prompt> gcc -o wordle wordle.c -Wall -Werror


2.2 Command Line Arguments


wordle has two required command-line arguments:


The first argument is a filename of the file which contains a list of words.
The second argument is the blacklist word.
Details


For all input, you can assume the lines will not exceed a length of 255.
In all non-error cases, wordle should exit with status code 0, usually by returning a 0 from main() (or by calling exit(0)).
If the program tries to fopen() a file and fails, it should print the exact message “wordle: cannot open file” (followed by a newline) and exit with status code 1.
If the program is passed invalid number of argumens, it should print the exact message “wordle: invalid number of args” (followed by a newline) and exit with status code 1.
All output (including error messages) should be printed to stdout.
All testcase input will contain only valid ASCII characters.  We will use the file /p/course/cs537-swift/tests/p1/wordlist.txt for testing. You can also use /p/course/cs537-swift/tests/p1/wordlist-small.txt for testing your program on small input.
 


3.  Testing and Handing in your Code
We will also be giving some points for good programming style and memory management. We will be running valgrind and a linter on your code. Read the details.
This project is to be done on the lab machinesLinks to an external site., so you can learn more about programming in C on a typical UNIX-based platform (Linux).
Some public tests are provided at /p/course/cs537-swift/tests/p1. Read more about the tests, including how to run them, by executing the command cat /p/course/cs537-swift/tests/p1/README.md on any lab machine. Note these test cases are not complete, and you are encouraged to create more on your own.  
Handing it in: Copy your source files to /p/course/cs537-swift/turnin/login/p1/ontime where login is your CS login. Do NOT use this turnin directory for your workspace.  You should keep a separate copy of your project files in your own home directory and then simply copy the relevant files to this handin directory when you are done.  The permissions to this handin directory will be turned off promptly when the deadline passes and you will no longer be able to modify files in that directory.   If you cannot find your handin directory, it is likely that you added the course after the first week of classes; in this case, send an email to the instructor asking for a handin directory; tell us your CS login. 
You can use up to 3 slip (late) days across all the projects throughout this semester; for example, you can use 1 slip day on three separate assignments or 3 slip days on a single assignment (or other combinations adding up to a total of 3 days).   If you are using slip days, you must create a file called slip_days with the full pathname /p/course/cs537-swift/turnin/login/p1/slip_days.  The file should contain a single line containing the integer number of slip days you are using; for example, you can create this file with "echo 1 > slip_days".  You must then copy your code into the corresponding slip directory: /p/course/cs537-swift/turnin/login/p1/slip1, /p/course/cs537-swift/turnin/login/p1/slip2, or /p/course/cs537-swift/turnin/login/p1/slip3.